docs: 2024H1 roadmap and why VoDa supports Ibis (#8184)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/why-voda-supports-ibis/index.qmd

Python frontend for dozens of data backends to reduce friction in the data
ecosystem.

### Why does Voltron Data (VoDa) support Ibis?

Why does Voltron Data employ a Technical Product Manager to work on Ibis
full-time? Why does Voltron Data employ five software engineers to work on Ibis
full-time? Great questions!

::: {.callout-note}
To understand Voltron Data -- or if you're generally interested in learning
about the composable data ecosystem -- check out the [The Composable
Codex by Voltron Data](https://voltrondata.com/codex).
:::

Voltron Data is a startup company founded in 2021 with the goal of making it
possible for organizations to build modular, composable, high-performance
systems for data analytics. Voltron Data advances open standards (like [Apache
Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org) and [Substrait](https://substrait.io)) and
builds software components that embrace these standards for maximum
interoperability and performance. This includes free and open source software
like Ibis.

![Standards](standards.png)

This also includes a commercially licensed product:
[Theseus](https://voltrondata.com/theseus), Voltron Data’s accelerator-native

> data processing engine, which can be embedded in existing platforms to increase
> speed, scale, and efficiency without a migration. What is unusual about Voltron
> Data is that the company is not building a proprietary platform around Theseus.
> Instead, it is partnering with other companies and organizations to embed
> Theseus in their products and platforms. Because of this, nothing that Voltron
> Data builds is tightly coupled only to Theseus. Everything that Voltron Data
> builds needs to work with as many other components as possible. Voltron Data
> sees data platform companies and data processing engines as complements to
> Theseus, not competitors.
> 
> Theseus is best for large workloads with extreme throughput demands, where
> CPU-based solutions struggle to scale. But for smaller workloads, engines like
> DuckDB are usually a better solution than Theseus, so Voltron Data is a [Gold
> Sponsor of the DuckDB Foundation](https://duckdb.org/foundation/). And for many
> data warehouse/lakehouse jobs, engines like Trino and platforms like Snowflake
> are better choices, so Voltron Data [partners with
> Starburst](https://www.starburst.io/blog/introducing-python-dataframes/) and
> [works](https://medium.com/snowflake/arrow-database-connectivity-adbc-support-for-snowflake-7bfb3a2d9074)
> [with](https://medium.com/snowflake/supercharging-the-snowflake-python-connector-with-nanoarrow-8388cb57eeba)
> [Snowflake](https://medium.com/snowflake/announcing-the-ga-release-of-snowflake-python-connector-with-nanoarrow-1d70fd8ba3b1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data processing engine. Theseus is a separate project built by a different team
at Voltron Data. Most Ibis contributors do not need to know about Theseus. Most
Ibis users will probably never use Theseus. But the two projects are related
parts of Voltron Data’s strategy.

The strategy goes like this:
- Big changes are afoot in the world of computing hardware. [Moore’s Law]
  (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore%27s_law) is coming to an end.
  Accelerated hardware such as NVIDIA GPUs are becoming more important for
  performance and efficiency—not just for AI and ML, but data analytics too.
- Big changes in hardware require big changes in software. But software has
  lagged behind in some areas. Distributed big data analytics is one area where
  the performance of existing software has lagged way behind hardware.
- Organizations choose data platforms based on many factors. No one chooses a
  data platform _only_ because it can very fast run on accelerated hardware.
- Wouldn’t it be nice if there was a composable data processing engine that
  could be embedded into _any_ data platform, to enable that platform to run
  jobs on accelerated hardware? Then the platform builders wouldn’t need to
  duplicate efforts. And organizations wouldn’t need to migrate to different
  platforms to accelerate their workloads.
- Voltron Data built Theseus to be that composable engine.
- Voltron Data is _not_ building a platform around Theseus. Instead, it is
  partnering with other companies and organizations to embed Theseus in their
  platforms.
- Theseus is great for very large-scale ETL workloads with very high throughput
  needs. For other types of workloads, other engines are better. Voltron Data
  wants to make it easy to choose the best engine for your workload. Your
  choice of engine or platform should not limit your choice of other tools.
- For example (this is where Ibis comes in!), your choice of engine or platform
  should not limit your choice of Python dataframe API. So Ibis works with 20+
  engines, including Theseus.

Ultimately, Voltron Data will be more successful if Ibis is successful. And the
same is true of any other company with an engine or platform that is the best
choice for some type of workload. Ibis makes it easy to switch which engine
you’re using. So the only reason to fear Ibis is if you have an uncompetitive
engine and your strategy for retaining customers is to lock them into using a
proprietary API that prevents them from switching.
```

Reviewer: This very last sentence is a little spicy, but I don't think it's too spicy.

Reviewer 2: Let the spice flow.

interface to Apache Impala. It received improvements and support over the years,
but really took off under the stewardship of [Phillip
Cloud](https://github.com/cpcloud) and the [current Ibis team at Voltron
Data](#who-are-the-core-contributors). It now supports 20+ backends and is
improving rapidly. It's never been a better time to get involved with Ibis.

You can see the inflection point in the number of commits to the repository in
early 2022:

![Ibis commits over time](commits.png)

### Who am I?

My name is Cody and I'm employed by Voltron Data to work on Ibis full-time as a
Technical Product Manager. I am an Ibis committer and have contributed Delta
Lake table input/output methods, helped moved the documentation over to
[Quarto](https://quarto.org), and created the [Zulip
chat](https://ibis-project.zulipchat.com) for the community.

My job is to help the Ibis community grow and thrive. I have a background in ML
(especially MLOps) and data products. Ibis solves many challenges I've seen in
the data space and I'm excited to help increase its adoption as a standard
Python frontend for dozens of data backends to reduce friction in the data

> ecosystem.

Author: noticing I messed up somewhere on previous feedback in this section

---
title: "Why Voltron Data supports Ibis"
author: "Cody Peterson + Ian Cook"
date: "2024-02-09"
image: standards.png
categories:
    - blog
---

## Overview

> The Ibis project is an [independently governed open source
> community](https://github.com/ibis-project/governance) that builds the portable
> Python dataframe library. It is primarily backed by [Voltron
> Data](https://voltrondata.com) but has
> [contributors](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/graphs/contributors) across
> a range of data companies and institutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ibis project is an [independently governed]
(https://github.com/ibis-project/governance) open source community project to
build and maintain **the portable Python dataframe library**. Ibis has
[contributors](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/graphs/contributors) across
a range of data companies and institutions. Today the core Ibis maintainers are
employed by [Voltron Data](https://voltrondata.com). Voltron Data’s support of
Ibis is a part of its strategy to enable modular and composable systems for
data analytics.
```

has  [contributors](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/graphs/contributors)
across  a range of data companies and institutions. Today the core Ibis
maintainers are  employed by [Voltron Data](https://voltrondata.com). Voltron
Data’s support of  Ibis is a part of its strategy to enable modular and
composable systems for  data analytics.

## Background

The Ibis project was started in 2015 by [Wes McKinney](https://wesmckinney.com),
the creator of pandas and a cofounder of Voltron Data, as a pandas-like
interface to Apache Impala. It received improvements and support over the years,
but really took off under the stewardship of [Phillip
Cloud](https://github.com/cpcloud) and the [current Ibis team at Voltron
Data](#who-are-the-core-contributors). It now supports 20+ backends and is
improving rapidly. It's never been a better time to get involved with Ibis.

You can see the inflection point in the number of commits to the repository in
early 2022:

![Ibis commits over time](commits.png)

### Who are we?

#### Cody

My name is Cody and I'm employed by Voltron Data to work on Ibis full-time as a
Technical Product Manager. I am an Ibis committer and have contributed Delta

> Lake table input/output methods, helped moved the documentation over to

Reviewer: typo
```suggestion
Lake table input/output methods, helped move the documentation over to
```

Author: missed this, just fixed

[Ibis is independently governed](https://github.com/ibis-project/governance) and
not owned by Voltron Data. Currently, four out of five members of the steering
committee are employed by Voltron Data (the fifth being at Alphabet working on
Google BigQuery). We are working toward a more diverse representation of
companies and organizations as the project continues to grow.

Voltron Data also welcomes this dilution of power and influence! A healthy
open source project is one that is not controlled by a single entity. This is
true of [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org) and other open source projects
that Voltron Data employees have been instrumental in building.
:::

### Who are the core contributors?

The core contributors working full-time on Ibis are employed at Voltron Data,
with deep experience on successful open source projects including pandas,
Apache Arrow, Dask, and more. Everything in the Ibis project is made possible by
their hard work! They are:

- [**Gil Forsyth**](https://github.com/gforsyth): long-time Ibis contributor and
 primary maintainer of the `ibis-substrait` package
- [**Jim Crist-Harif**](https://github.com/jcrist): the engineering manager for

>  the Ibis team at VoDa

Reviewer 2: We should expand the shorthand here.
